Psaume 19 : The skies, the Scriptures

The very sound of the two movements of the psalm tells something of their two concerns: the broad sweep of God’s wordless revelation in the universe, expressed in the exuberant lines of verses 1–6, and the clarity of his written word, reflected in the quiet conciseness of verses 7–10, to which the heart-searching of 11–14 is the worshipper’s response.
It is unimportant to decide whether two psalms have been brought together, or whether the two themes complemented one another from the first within a single poem (although the abrupt end of verses 1–7 tells against the former view). What is bequeathed to us is one psalm, whose two parts greatly illuminate one another. Again, whether or not David drew on existing poetry for his description of the sun, his praise was wholly for its Creator; and all the more pointedly so if he was capturing this language for the first time for its proper use.
The psalm is quoted in Romans 10:18, and its thought may also underlie the argument of Romans 1:18ff., that God’s eternal power and deity are ‘clearly perceived in the things that have been made’. Its theology is as powerful as its poetry.


19:1–6. The eloquence of nature

Different ages need this reminder—for such it is (Rom. 1:19)—in different ways. The ancients were tempted to ‘kiss their hand’ to sun and moon and the host of heaven (cf. Job. 31:26f.; 2 Kgs 23:15); the moderns to explain them away as fortuitous, in one mood, or to revert to astrology in another. Only the Christian is moved to filial wonder and joy at the thought of their Maker.
2. The expression, pours forth, suggests the irrepressible bubbling up of a spring, and therefore perhaps the unfailing variety with which the days reflect the Creator’s mind. The book of Job enlarges on this, especially in the sky-scapes of chapters 37 and 38. Knowledge is well matched with night, since without the night skies man would have known, until recently, nothing but an empty universe.
3, 4. The paradox of wordless speech is brought out by the modern versions, rightly, as against AV; but RSV’s speculative repetition of voice is clumsy and not in fact supported by the LXX (quoted in Rom. 10:18), which uses, instead, a synonym for voice (‘cry, sound’) in verse 4. Translate it, therefore, ‘yet their cry goes out …’. Such a synonym is a defensible rendering of the existing Hebrew word, whose commoner meaning is ‘line’ (AV, RV, RSV mg.). The parallel noun, words, in 4b, supports ‘cry, sound’, etc., as against ‘line’; although the latter makes reasonable sense if it indicates that no boundaries restrict these witnesses (cf. 2 Cor. 10:13). But a suggestion by Weiser that it means ‘their plumbline’, and thus ‘their law’, would give these natural phenomena too specialized a role.
Addison’s hymn sums up these verses very finely:

    What though nor real voice nor sound
    Amid their radiant orbs be found;
    In reason’s ear they all rejoice,
    And utter forth a glorious voice,
    For ever singing as they shine,
    ‘The hand that made us is divine.’

4c–6. The sun, suddenly and emphatically introduced in 4c, now dominates the scene, exultant and magnificent, yet obedient. God has assigned it its place to occupy (4c) and its course to run; the whole sky its mere tent and track. Such are God’s servants and visible establishment (‘the outskirts of his ways’, Job 26:14).
5, 6. Some commentators (e.g. Weiser) see a poetic allusion to tales of a sun-god who returns each night to the ocean and to his bride, and sets out again in the morning. A more likely allusion is to a human wedding, when the bridegroom, splendidly arrayed, sets forth to the house of the bride to claim her. Such is the radiance and festive mood of the journey. All would agree that the psalm, if it glances at mythology, repudiates it. The sun may be ‘like’ a bridegroom or a runner; it is in fact no more than a glorious part of God’s ‘handiwork’ (1). But as such, it proclaims the extent (6a) and penetration (6b) of his rule.


19:7–14. The clarity of Scripture

‘Two things’, according to Kant, ‘fill the mind with ever new and increasing admiration and awe … the starry heavens above and the moral law within.’ The psalm transcends the second of these themes by looking to the divine law revealed; evoking not only ‘admiration and awe’ but the person-to-Person response of verses 11–14. In this section the revealed name of God, Yahweh (the Lord), is heard seven times; earlier, true to the theme of general revelation, only the least specific term for God (El, verse 1) was used, and only once.
7–10. As in Psalm 119, where still more synonyms are used, these six facets of revelation are not sharply distinguished, yet each has a certain character of its own. Here we shall study them by means of the nouns, adjectives and verbs in turn.
a. The nouns. Law (tôrâ) is the comprehensive term for God’s revealed will. Testimony (‘ēdût) is its aspect as truth attested by God himself (cf. 1 John 5:9); it is also a term for his covenant-declaration (cf. Exod. 25:16 with, e.g., Deut. 9:9). Precepts and commandment indicate the precision and authority with which God addresses us, while fear, or reverence, emphasizes the human response fostered by his word. Ordinances, or judgments (mišpāṭîm), are the judicial decisions he has recorded about various human situations (cf. on 18:22).
Together, these terms show the practical purpose of revelation, to bring God’s will to bear on the hearer and evoke intelligent reverence, well-founded trust, detailed obedience.
b. The adjectives. For perfect, see on 18:30, and cf. the description of God’s will in Romans 12:2. Sure, by its passive form, can mean not only what is firm but what is confirmed: cf. ‘verified’ in Genesis 42:20. Right means morally right, or straight. On pure and clean, David’s own comment is in Psalm 12:6, seen in contrast to 12:1–4. True is lit. ‘truth’, in the sense of dependability. In all, these epithets move in a different world from the compromise, insincerity and half-truths of human intercourse.
c. The verbs. The first four, reviving, making wise, etc., (7, 8) enlarge on what Scripture does for men; the remaining two (since righteous [9] translates a verb here) on what it is in itself. On reviving, see on 23:3. In the phrase (they are) righteous altogether, the adverb means, rather, ‘together’, i.e. all alike: cf. NEB, JB, ‘righteous every one’. Matthew Henry comments, ‘they are all of a piece’.
11–14. Here is the spiritual counterpart of verse 6c: ‘there is nothing hid …’ The fact is not only stated but demonstrated by David’s quickened concern aroused by the blessings (10, 11b) as well as the warnings (11a) of Scripture. The two-edged sword has penetrated.
12, 13. It was the Mosaic law which made these inner distinctions between sins, yet succeeded (as these verses show) in leaving no sin condoned. Verse 12a recognizes that a fault may be hidden not because it is too small to see, but because it is too characteristic to register. On both verses see Numbers 15:27–36, where the outward triviality of the incident underlines the gravity with which God viewed its motivation. A Jewish admonition is to the point: ‘Do not say, “I sinned, and what happened to me?” … Do not be so confident of atonement that you add sin to sin’ (Ecclus. 5:4f.).
14. The psalm ends, not on the note of avoiding sin, but on that of offering back to God the mind’s fitting response to his own words, as a pure sacrifice (cf. Hos. 14:2). This is the probable implication of acceptable, a term often found in sacrificial contexts. And God is addressed not as the sinner’s accuser or judge but as his refuge (my rock; see on 18:2) and champion (my redeemer, as in, e.g., Lev. 25:25; Job 19:25). This sinner can call himself ‘thy servant’ (11, 13): he belongs to him by the covenant which the law itself presupposes.


Kidner, Derek. 1973. Psalms 1–72: an introduction and commentary (Tyndale Old Testament Commentaries). Vol. 15. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press.